---
layout: research
title: Research interests
---
The expression of developmental genes is carefully controlled because they affect dramatic cellular changes such as lineage commitment and cellular differentiation. The developmental genes that facilitate these important biological transitions are frequently associated with an array of cis-acting regulatory elements which provide a platform for transcription factors proteins to control the expression of the target gene. The cell controls the accessibility of these elements using an assortment of epigenetic modifications. Together with chromatin architectural proteins, such as CTCF, these elements and transcription factors form a local compartment of chromatin loops that maximise enhancer-promoter contacts resulting in expression changes. The properties of regulatory elements located within and around developmental genes are frequently difficult to disambiguate because they can have redundant or additive functions.

Particular types of DNA structural mutations, such as chromosome translocations and inversions allow for a simple two-part dissection of regulatory elements from their target gene. In the Duboule Lab, we utilise a collection of structural mutations in the HoxD locus to study how the local chromatin architecture influences the transcription of these genes in vivo. The HoxD cluster contains nine Hoxd genes that are expressed in multiple domains of the embryo during a coordinated wave of transcription from one end of the cluster to the other. This remarkable property, termed collinearity, is controlled by regulatory elements disbursed around the cluster of genes. By disrupting the cis-regulation of these genes, dramatic morphological changes emerge in the embryo. This effect has been observed in species as ancient as the fruitfly, and is a unique property of the Hox genes, demonstrating their powerful influence on the formation of body patterns.

In pursuit of this knowledge, the primary goal of my research is to understand how long-range genetic regulation modulates expression of genes during embryonic development. Specifically, my current work in the Duboule Lab is focused on two projects. The first is an analysis of Hox gene function during the formation of the urogenital system. The formation of these tissues begins around embryonic day E10.5, which is concurrent with the establishment of Hox gene expression domains along the mesoderm, from which these organs arise. Interestingly, the anterior boundaries of Hoxd and Hoxa genes delineate the boundaries of nearly every portion of the urinary and reproductive systems. Loss-of-function mutations in the HoxA or HoxD clusters cause homeotic transformations in these tissues, several of which are similar to human congenital malformations. I am working to understand how the HoxD genes are regulated during the formation and maintenance of these structures. 

My second project is focused on the gene Hoxd13 during formation of the handplate (autopod). The expression of this gene is very tightly controlled during limb formation because premature activation of Hoxd13 abruptly terminates the collinearity program resulting in abbreviated arms and legs. Our previous work has shown that a chromatin structure sequesters Hoxd13 from the activating mechanism that works on the adjacent genes in the cluster. The same work has shown that Hoxd13 is in constitutive contact with many positions in the adjacent gene desert but when the gene is activated, a few additional elements gain chromatin contact with Hoxd13. To parse the regulatory structure controlling Hoxd13, we are utilising the CRISPR system to precisely modify elements that control Hoxd13 in vivo. A main goal for this work is to determine how enhancers act on specific target genes in a complex chromatin landscape and how enhancer elements control the properties of the adjacent chromatin. 
